Title: Nemesis
Author: H. P. Lovecraft
Year: 1917
+++
	Thro’ the ghoul-guarded gateways of slumber,
		Past the wan-moon’d abysses of night,
	I have liv’d o’er my lives without number,
		I have sounded all things with my sight;
And I struggle and shriek ere the daybreak, being driven to madness with fright.

	I have whirl’d with the earth at the dawning,
		When the sky was a vaporous flame;
	I have seen the dark universe yawning,
		Where the black planets roll without aim;
Where they roll in their horror unheeded, without knowledge or lustre or name.

	I had drifted o’er seas without ending,
		Under sinister grey-clouded skies
	That the many-fork’d lightning is rending,
		That resound with hysterical cries;
With the moans of invisible daemons that out of the green waters rise.

	I have plung’d like a deer thro’ the arches
		Of the hoary primordial grove,
	Where the oaks feel the presence that marches
		And stalks on where no spirit dares rove;
And I flee from a thing that surrounds me, and leers thro’ dead branches above.

	I have stumbled by cave-ridden mountains
		That rise barren and bleak from the plain,
	I have drunk of the fog-foetid fountains
		That ooze down to the marsh and the main;
And in hot cursed tarns I have seen things I care not to gaze on again.

	I have scann’d the vast ivy-clad palace,
		I have trod its untenanted hall,
	Where the moon writhing up from the valleys
		Shews the tapestried things on the wall;
Strange figures discordantly woven, which I cannot endure to recall.

	I have peer’d from the casement in wonder
		At the mouldering meadows around,
	At the many-roof’d village laid under
		The curse of a grave-girdled ground;
And from rows of white urn-carven marble I listen intently for sound.

	I have haunted the tombs of the ages,
		I have flown on the pinions of fear
	Where the smoke-belching Erebus rages,
		Where the jokulls loom snow-clad and drear:
And in realms where the sun of the desert consumes what it never can cheer.

	I was old when the Pharaohs first mounted
		The jewel-deck’d throne by the Nile;
	I was old in those epochs uncounted
		When I, and I only, was vile;
And Man, yet untainted and happy, dwelt in bliss on the far Arctic isle.

	Oh, great was the sin of my spirit,
		And great is the reach of its doom;
	Not the pity of Heaven can cheer it,
		Nor can respite be found in the tomb:
Down the infinite aeons come beating the wings of unmerciful gloom.

	Thro’ the ghoul-guarded gateways of slumber,
		Past the wan-moon’d abysses of night,
	I have liv’d o’er my lives without number,
		I have sounded all things with my sight;
And I struggle and shriek ere the daybreak, being driven to madness with fright. 